Add programmatic interaction to deploy-and-interact entry guide (#65)
OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-docs: components/learn/modules/ROOT/pages/deploy-and-interact.adoc

This guide will cover all you need to know to get you started using your contracts, including:

 * <<local-blockchain, Setting up a Local Blockchain>>

>  * <<getting-started-with-the-cli, Install the OpenZeppelin CLI>>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * <<getting-started-with-the-cli, Installing the OpenZeppelin CLI>>
```

The low-level details of deploying and interacting with contracts are quite involved, but you won't need to worry about them: the https://docs.openzeppelin.com/sdk/2.6/[*OpenZeppelin command-line interface (CLI)*] will take care of these processes for you.

> You may have used the CLI already to xref:writing-smart-contracts.adoc#compiling-solidity-source-code[compile your contracts] - if not, install it now in a new npm project:

Reviewer: This seems to imply the CLI cannot be installed on non-new projects. Should we move the `npm init` bit to a project setup guide?

Author: Good catch! Removing it

[[interacting-programatically]]
== Interacting Programatically

> While interacting via the command line is useful for running quick tests, in the end you will want to interact with your contracts from your own code. Here, we will see how to use https://web3js.readthedocs.io/en/1.2.4/[web3.js] to do so, so let's install it.

Reviewer: I'm not sure the need for programmatic interactions is obvious to all readers, specially in an introductory guide. Perhaps we could add some simple examples? The notion of 'quick tests' is similarly not self-evident.

Author: Changed

> [source,console]

Reviewer: I've been using triple backticks, but wouldn't mind switching to this style, as long as all guides are consistent.

Author: Does it really matter?

Reviewer: I thought it changed how the css classes for the blocks were picked, but that doesn't seem to be the case any more. Feel free to use whichever :stuck_out_tongue:

----

> npm install web3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ npm install web3
```

----

> TIP: Keep in mind that there are many other javascript libraries available, and you can use whichever you like the most. Once a contract is deployed, you can interact with it through any library!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TIP: Keep in mind that there are many other JavaScript libraries available, and you can use whichever you like the most. Once a contract is deployed, you can interact with it through any library!
```

Reviewer: `s/javascript/JavaScript/g` :stuck_out_tongue:

[[connecting-to-the-network]]
=== Connecting to the Network

> Let's begin coding in a new `src/index.js` file, where we will be writing our javascript script. We will start with some boilerplate for writing async code, and setting up a new `web3` object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's begin coding in a new `src/index.js` file, where we will be writing our javascript script. We will start with some boilerplate for writing async code:
```

[source,js]
----

> const Web3 = require('web3');

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// src/index.js
const Web3 = require('web3');
```

async function main() {
  // Set up web3 object, connected to the local development network

>   const web3 = new Web3('http://localhost:8545');

Reviewer: Given that we're about to repeat this line below and we haven't yet touched on localhost here, I'd drop this line.

}

main();
----

> Here, we are initializing a new `web3` instance connecting to the local development network we started earlier, that is running on localhost port 8545. We can test if the connection works by asking something to the local node, such as the list of enabled accounts:

Reviewer: Following the theme of the last two comments, I'd present `web3` in a bit more detail here. No need for full-blown explanation, just mention:
 * `web3` is an object connected to a blockchain
 * we use it to send transactions and queries

It then follows we want to get one of these, and clearly we need to connect it to our ganache instance (link to the `local-blockchain` section).

Author: Changed

[source,js]
----
// Set up web3 object, connected to the local development network
const web3 = new Web3('http://localhost:8545');

// Retrieve accounts from the local node
const accounts = await web3.eth.getAccounts();
console.log(accounts);
----

NOTE: We will not be repeating the boilerplate code on every snippet, but make sure to always code _inside_ the `main` function we defined above!

Run the code above using `node`, and check that you are getting a list of available accounts in response. 

[source,console]
----
$ node src/index.js 
[ '0x90F8bf6A479f320ead074411a4B0e7944Ea8c9C1',
  '0xFFcf8FDEE72ac11b5c542428B35EEF5769C409f0',
  ... ]
----

> These accounts should match the ones you got when you ran `openzeppelin accounts` earlier. Now that we have our first code snippet for getting data out of a blockchain, let's start working with our contract.

Reviewer: I've been using the `oz` alias, do we have a preference?

Author: Switched to oz. I'll check that we clarify both uses in the first CLI guide.

> These accounts should match the ones you got when you ran `openzeppelin accounts` earlier. Now that we have our first code snippet for getting data out of a blockchain, let's start working with our contract.

Reviewer: I think the second sentence works better as an introduction for the next section, rather than the end of this one. I'd add a link to the snippets here from there too, so that people skimming or being linked here directly have a chance to get the necessary context.

Reviewer: Now that I've read the whole guide, this seems a very deliberate choice: it happens on every single section :stuck_out_tongue: 

I personally prefer each section to stand and introduce itself on its own, instead of relying on lone sentences from the previous one. This lets them stablish prerequisites and link back to referenced material.

Author: Note that the next section does not _need_ the ending sentence from the previous one to be complete. If a reader skims through the text and gets to this section, the text still makes sense.

[[getting-a-contract-instance]]

> === Getting a contract instance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Getting a Contract Instance
```

Apparently title capitalization is rather important. I use https://capitalizemytitle.com/ when I'm unsure what the proper capitalization should be.

> In order to interact with our deployed `Box` contract, we will create a new https://web3js.readthedocs.io/en/1.2.4/web3-eth-contract.html[web3 contract instance]. This is a javascript object that represents our contract in the blockchain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to interact with the <<box-contract,`Box`>> contract we <<deploying-a-smart-contract, deployed using the CLI>>, we will create a new https://web3js.readthedocs.io/en/1.2.4/web3-eth-contract.html[web3 contract instance]. This is a javascript object that represents our contract in the blockchain.
```

To create this web3 contract, we need two things:

* The address where it is deployed
* The ABI of the contract, which is the definition of the contract's public functions

> The address was returned by the OpenZeppelin CLI when we deployed the contract. As for the ABI, we can retrieve it from the compiled artifact in the `build/contracts` folder as shown below.

Reviewer: Should we introduce contract-loader here?

[source,js]
----
// Set up web3 object, connected to the local development network
const web3 = new Web3('http://localhost:8545');

// Set up a web3 contract, representing our deployed Box instance
const address = '0xCfEB869F69431e42cdB54A4F4f105C19C080A601';
const abi = require('../build/contracts/Box.json').abi;
const box = new web3.eth.Contract(abi, address);
----

NOTE: Make sure to replace the `address` with the one you got when deploying the contract, which may be different to the one shown here.

We can now use this javascript object to interact with our contract.

[[calling-the-contract]]

> === Calling the Contract

Reviewer: What do you think about mirroring the CLI section (send a transaction, then query state)? 

We'll avoid repeating ourselves here by leveraging the content ther. Additionally, this might make the JS snippets easier to understand, and will help draw parallels between web3's and the CLI's API.

Author: I was tempted to do so, but in the programmatic example, calling the contract is **much** simpler than sending a tx, that's why I preferred to switch the order here.

Reviewer: Contract Loader sets default values for gas and gas price if you don't provide any (1gwei and 200k gas), precisely to make these sort of simple scripts easy. All we'd need to do is set up the from account, which nicely mirrors the CLI interactively asking for it (and have also just showcased `eth.getAccounts()`).

Reviewer: I just noticed the CLI _doesn't_ ask for `from` on `send-tx`: it blindly uses the first account. This inconsistency makes me want to revise that behaviour.

Author: I don't think it's an inconsistency: programmatic usage and interactive CLIs are used in different contexts, it makes sense that they use different defaults.

> Let's start by displaying the current value of the `Box` contract. We will need to https://web3js.readthedocs.io/en/1.0/web3-eth-contract.html#methods-mymethod-call[call] into the `retrieve()` public method of the contract, and https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/await[await] the response:

Reviewer: Note that we've already used async/await syntax: we should link to the MDN docs then.

Author: Added

[source,js]
----
// Call the retrieve() function of the deployed Box contract

> const value = await box.methods.retrieve().call();

Reviewer: I'd emphasize this `.call()` is the same as the CLI's `call` command.

console.log(value);
----

Make sure everything is running smoothly by running the script again and checking the printed value:

[source,console]
----
$ node src/index.js
5
----

> NOTE: If you restarted ganache between the xref:first.adoc[previous tutorial] and this one, the returned value will be zero, since all state will have been cleared.

Reviewer: This is a reference to the old SDK guide, but if we end up reordering call and send, we could drop this note entirely.

Author: Edited

TIP: To learn more about `send-tx` and `call`, check out the https://docs.openzeppelin.com/sdk/2.6/api/cli[CLI API reference].

[[interacting-programmatically]]
== Interacting Programmatically

> The command-line is useful for protyping and running one-off commands. However, eventually you will want to interact with your contracts from your own application, which means calling or sending transaction in code. In this section, we will see how to use https://web3js.readthedocs.io/en/1.2.4/[web3.js] to interact with our contracts from JavaScript, and https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-contract-loader[@openzeppelin/contract-loader] to load them. Let's begin by installing them:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The command-line is useful for protyping and running one-off commands. However, eventually you will want to interact with your contracts from your own application, which means calling or sending transaction in code. 

In this section, we will see how to use https://web3js.readthedocs.io/en/1.2.4/[web3.js] to interact with our contracts from JavaScript, and the https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-contract-loader[*OpenZeppelin Contract Loader*] to load them. Let's begin by installing them:
```

[source,console]
----
$ npm install web3 @openzeppelin/contract-loader
----

> TIP: Keep in mind that there are many other JavaScript libraries available, and you can use whichever you like the most. Once a contract is deployed, you can interact with it through any library!

Reviewer: I'd consider removing this: I don't think it adds much, and it can be distracting. After all, our guide _is_ web3-specific (and web3 is the library we support and recommend).

Author: Disagree. I think it's important to clarify that using the CLI requires a lock-in to a specific library. And for distractness, that's why it's on a separate box (TIP, in this case).

[[connecting-to-the-network]]
=== Connecting to the Network

> Let's begin coding in a new `src/index.js` file, where we will be writing our JavaScript script. We will start with some boilerplate for loading the libraries and https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/async_function[writing async code].

Reviewer: From here on the text feels a bit repetitive: most sentences start with 'we will'. Consider slightly rephrasing them to avoid this.

Author: Couldn't do much here. I did change all _we will_ to _we'll_ to be consistent across the guide.

[source,js]
----
// src/index.js
const Web3 = require('web3');
const { setupLoader } = require('@openzeppelin/contract-loader');

async function main() {
  // Our code will go here
}

main();
----

> We will first initialize a new `web3` instance. A `web3` instance is an object that holds a connection to a blockchain node, and allows us to send transactions and queries. We will create one connecting to the local development network we started earlier, that is running on localhost port 8545. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will first initialize a new `web3` instance. This is an object that holds a connection to a blockchain node, and allows us to send transactions and queries. We will create one connecting to the <<local-blockchain, local development network>> we started earlier, which is running on localhost port 8545. 
```

We can test if the connection works by asking something to the local node, such as the list of enabled accounts:

[source,js]
----
// Set up web3 object, connected to the local development network
const web3 = new Web3('http://localhost:8545');

// Retrieve accounts from the local node
const accounts = await web3.eth.getAccounts();
console.log(accounts);
----

NOTE: We will not be repeating the boilerplate code on every snippet, but make sure to always code _inside_ the `main` function we defined above!

Run the code above using `node`, and check that you are getting a list of available accounts in response. 

[source,console]
----
$ node src/index.js 
[ '0x90F8bf6A479f320ead074411a4B0e7944Ea8c9C1',
  '0xFFcf8FDEE72ac11b5c542428B35EEF5769C409f0',
  ... ]
----

These accounts should match the ones you got when you ran `oz accounts` earlier. Now that we have our first code snippet for getting data out of a blockchain, let's start working with our contract.

[[getting-a-contract-instance]]
=== Getting a Contract Instance

> In order to interact with the <<box-contract,`Box`>> contract we <<deploying-a-smart-contract, deployed using the CLI>>, we will create a new https://web3js.readthedocs.io/en/1.2.4/web3-eth-contract.html[web3 contract instance] using https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-contract-loader[@openzeppelin/contract-loader]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to interact with the <<box-contract,`Box`>> contract we <<deploying-a-smart-contract, deployed using the CLI>>, we will create a new https://web3js.readthedocs.io/en/1.2.4/web3-eth-contract.html[web3 contract instance] using the https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-contract-loader[*OpenZeppelin Contract Loader*]. 
```

> A web3 contract instance is a javascript object that represents our contract in the blockchain, which we can use to interact with our contract. To create one, we need to provide the `contract-loader` with the contract name and the address where it was deployed - the address was the value returned by the CLI when we deployed the contract via `oz create`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A web3 contract instance is a JavaScript object that represents our contract in the blockchain, which we can use to interact with our contract. To create one we need to provide the Contract Loader with the contract name and the address where it was deployed, which the CLI returned when we ran `oz create`.
```

[source,js]
----
// Set up web3 object, connected to the local development network, and a contract loader
const web3 = new Web3('http://localhost:8545');
const loader = setupLoader({ provider: web3 }).web3;

// Set up a web3 contract, representing our deployed Box instance, using the contract loader
const address = '0xCfEB869F69431e42cdB54A4F4f105C19C080A601';
const box = loader.fromArtifact('Box', address);
----

NOTE: Make sure to replace the `address` with the one you got when deploying the contract, which may be different to the one shown here.

We can now use this JavaScript object to interact with our contract.

[[calling-the-contract]]
=== Calling the Contract

Let's start by displaying the current value of the `Box` contract. We will need to https://web3js.readthedocs.io/en/1.0/web3-eth-contract.html#methods-mymethod-call[call] into the `retrieve()` public method of the contract, and https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/await[await] the response:

[source,js]
----
// Call the retrieve() function of the deployed Box contract
const value = await box.methods.retrieve().call();
console.log("Box value is", value);
----

> This snippet is equivalent to the `oz call` we ran earlier from the command line. Now, make sure everything is running smoothly by running the script again and checking the printed value:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This snippet is equivalent to the `oz call` we ran earlier from the CLI. Now, make sure everything is running smoothly by running the script again and checking the printed value:
```

[source,console]
----
$ node src/index.js
Box value is 5
----

> NOTE: If you restarted ganache at any point, this script may fail. Restarting ganache clears all local blockchain state, so the `Box` contract instance will not be at the expected address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[WARNING]
====
If you restarted ganache at any point, this script may fail. Restarting ganache clears all local blockchain state, so the `Box` contract instance will not be at the expected address.

If this happens, simply <<local-blockchain, start ganache>> and <<deploying-a-smart-contract, redeploy>> the `Box` contract.
====
```

NOTE: In a real-world application, you may want to https://web3js.readthedocs.io/en/1.0/web3-eth-contract.html#methods-mymethod-estimategas[estimate the gas] of your transactions, and check a https://ethgasstation.info/[gas price oracle] to know the optimal values to use on every transaction.

Let's store a value of `20` in our `Box`, and then use the code we had written before to display the updated value:

[source,js]
----
// Retrieve accounts from the local node, we will use the first one to send the transaction
const accounts = await web3.eth.getAccounts();

// Send a transaction to store() a new value in the Box
await box.methods.store(20)
  .send({ from: accounts[0], gas: 50000, gasPrice: 1e6 });

// Call the retrieve() function of the deployed Box contract
const value = await box.methods.retrieve().call();
console.log("Box value is", value);
----

We can now run the snippet, and check that the box's value is updated!

[source,console]
----
$ node src/index.js
Box value is 20
----

== Next Steps

> After going through this guide, you should have learned how to deploy your contracts to a local blockchain and interact with them, both manually and programmatically, using either the OpenZeppelin CLI or the web3.js library respectively. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Now that you can start writing full smart-contract projects, you will need to look into setting up environments for automated testing, staging, and eventually production. Fortunately, we have you covered:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you know how to set up a local blockchain, deploy contracts and interact with them both manually and programmatically, you will need to learn about testing environments, public test networks and going to production:
```

> * xref:unit-testing.adoc[Automated testing of smart contract projects]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* xref:unit-testing.adoc[Automated Testing]
```

> * xref:public-staging.adoc[Deploying to a public test network]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* xref:public-staging.adoc[Deploying to a Public Test Network]
```

> * xref:mainnet.adoc[Going to mainnet]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* xref:mainnet.adoc[Deploying to Mainnet]
```
